hello and welcome to the Wellness as a
service podcast a podcast tracking the
future of data-driven disease prevention
life extension and wellness optimization
consumer products and services and now
over to your host Liev Schreiber has
been quite a hiatus since the last guest
bet Ben Wang back in February I kicked
off this podcast late summer 2018
because more and more people were asking
for a follow-up conference to the event
I produced back in fall 2016 but I
absolutely didn't have the time
instantly because I was busy 12 hours a
day seven days a week consulting as a
result of that event I hope though it
was an interim this podcast would at
least keep some conversation and
momentum going that had started back
then but then just after a great guest
two things occurred in parallel it
became obvious that there is a growing
need for a boutique consultancy advisory
and Marc intelligence agency in this
area it was a bit like when back in 2008
identified and Roy pre-launch an iOS pre
SDK and held an event jumping them and
then so immediately as a consequence of
that event the need to provide advisory
and Marc intelligence around mobile apps
and what was later to be known as a
mobile app stores things like number of
downloads developers on each platform
developer tools store ranking methods
etc the second was I had a growing sense
that something was slightly off by
didn't know what however during the time
I realized what it was
anti-aging stroke Life Extension is
moving exponentially and as such I
should not keep it as a subcategory
under the banner of optimization as I've
been doing it needed instead pooling to
the forefront also because I'd only ever
worked b2b I haven't worked many
hundreds of founders I was treating the
content of this podcast is only for
discussion among
business leaders I don't think that was
right when much of the content is of
interest and of great value to the
public at large the outcome is a website
hyper well-being calm which was an event
website then late last year became a
podcast site is as of a week ago now a
consulting site for hyper well-being
innovation labs Incorporated and what
you're listening to now has been renamed
the Wellness as a service podcast and
what was a hyper well-being blog has
been redesigned as of a week ago in a
couple of days all also for personal
blogs I driver calm that is my surname
calm to be clear my plan is to push
myself to write in either of these two
blogs and later on publish a book taken
into account feedback on articles I'd
love to say much more
I've got Travis Kristofferson online
ready for chat and he has a great book I
tomorrow curable how an unlikely group
of radical innovators is trying to
transform our healthcare system
Travis is also the author of tripping
over the truth
he received his undergraduate degree in
molecular biology from the Honors
College at Madonna State University and
a master's degree in material
engineering and science from the South
Dakota School of Mines and technology
today he is a full-time science writer
the finder of a cancer charity dedicated
to affordable cancer therapies and a
co-founder of Karen ecology USA he lives
in South Dakota a great welcome Travis
as a first guess on Phase two of what is
now the Wellness as a service podcast
highly thanks for having me appreciate
it if we jump in straight away with a
introduction of your book you mentioned
Michael Lewis's Moneyball book it's a
book about baseball and you make a
number of references to it throughout
your book could you introduce Moneyball
and say why it was so significant for
you yeah yeah Moneyball so if for your
listeners if they haven't heard of it
it's
was a book by Michael Lewis I believe it
came out in 2001 and then subsequently
was made into a movie with Brad Pitt and
the story line is about the Oakland A's
and their data-driven approach to
picking players and it's you know for me
it was just a wonderful story because
baseball has been around for over a
hundred years you know it's got this
rich history it's a relatively simple
game and you would think that the
mechanics of it or the process would be
improved to as good as it could be so
the story of Moneyball is this small
market team the Oakland A's had I think
at that time the second lowest budget
and the in the in the major league
baseball it was three times less than
that of the New York Yankees and so they
were just trying to survive you know how
how what could compete with these guys
with so much more money and the idea was
they they basically fired their talent
scouts and switched to a completely
analytical driven approach to picking
players and Michael Lewis told kind of a
funny story when he was researching the
book he stumbled in the Oakland A's
locker room and he just happened to
stumble in right when the Oakland A's
were taking a shower and he said you
know he saw these Oakland A's naked and
and the sight was disturbing in the fact
that they just did not look like
professional athletes some of them were
overweight you know kind of misshapen
but this was why the talent scouts were
getting this wrong they were not they
were judging these guys on superficial
measures rather than the measures that
really mattered the data show that these
guys were good players so the year they
assembled this team based just based on
analytics they did fantastic they broke
a record with 20 straight wins in a row
they could they won the their division
so their approach has been proven out
ironically tonight is a game between
Oakland A's and the Tampa raised and the
Tampa Rays have the lowest budget right
now in major league baseball and I think
Oakland is 25th out of 30 now so these
two very low-budget teams are competing
in the wild-card spot this evening they
both have had wonderful wonderful
seasons but both of them including two
EPIP a have switched
to a or have adopted an analytical
approach and what I thought was just so
unique for the book you know you're
always trying to have these narrative
arcs and this was a relatively easy sort
of example to give about how data can
overcome our biases as human beings and
I try to then go on to show that
healthcare is really dominated by these
biases and we need to switch more to
this analytical model like like the
Oakland A's had done in Moneyball that
was a very nice coverage of Moneyball I
like your style of writing
you're a previous book in fact tripping
over the truth how the metabolic theory
of cancer is overturning one of
Medicine's most entrenched paradigms was
one of my favorite books and I I thought
it was brilliant actually where did the
inspiration come for your new book which
is curable the story of how an unlikely
group of radical innovators is trying to
transform our healthcare system which is
launching tomorrow that will be the
third of October on Kendall where did
the inspiration come from it was very
similar to the inspiration for the first
book just kind of these epiphany moments
and I was lucky to have with with
curable I had because of tripping on
with the truth I had been given
opportunities and one of the interesting
one was to give a talk the small charity
event in the UK and at this event I met
a medical doctor that was part of this
new startup called Care oncology and
what they do is they specialize in
repurposed medications so these are
medications that have had FDA approval
for a long time and the idea is to use
them for new or different disease
indications that the data shows they may
have efficacy in and I was so taken
aback by this model that I struck up a
deal with them and agreed to help bring
it to the United States so we opened up
a clinic about a year later the good
friend of mine and in my hometown Rapid
City South Dakota which is a very small
sort of conservative community and I was
given the opportunity to present what
care oncology did our treatment to the
oncologist at the local Cancer Center
and I'd hope they'd receive it you know
well it was a 20 minute presentation in
front of all the oncologists the nurses
the pharmacists in the head the medical
director of the Cancer Center and I just
went through the data explained what we
were doing why does model I felt was so
good and you know for numerous reasons
repurposed drugs have many advantages
one being safety because they've been
around so long you know interactions you
know side-effects and the other is you
get these big blocks of data that you
can look at when drugs have been in the
clinic for for long periods of time and
so I presented this data in this
rationale and I had one of the
oncologists immediately just start
flinging accusations and towards the end
of this one of the drugs we use as a
type two diabetes drug called metformin
and the data is very clear that it shows
it can help improve outcomes almost in
every type of cancer and it's a very
cheap drug and it's extraordinarily safe
so the risk reward is very easier to
measure and he mentioned towards the end
of the talk why would you use a type two
diabetes drug and cancer and then one of
the oncologists sitting off in the
corner said will I use it to help
prevent recurrence and just in that
moment it struck me how far off track
medicine is really gotten if you can
have two oncologists in the same room
one befuddled while you're using this
drug and the other embracing it
wholeheartedly you know how does this
situation come to be and that was really
the inspiration to really examine
healthcare and how these huge
disparities and variations can exist and
that was the inspiration for curable hey
thank you very much like it if he beam
comparing for these questions it's yeah
rather concise well yeah when do we
write the book it's easy to you know
just resuscitate what's already there
yeah but there's a lot more in the book
can you you danced around it quite
nicely as you know I've been I see a
secondary health care emerging one I've
been dubbing wellness as a service and
LU of a better moniker and being
predictive and preventative it's about
risk and probability particularly
individualized
but from what I've witnessed for a
number of years now doctors generally
speaking don't know about statistics not
even absolute versus relative risk even
when dispensing of drugs like statins so
let me just skim read something in front
of me today from the British Medical
Journal these criticisms may be fair but
they don't disguise a broader point that
clinicians whether they're working in
primary care or Hospital practice have a
poor understanding of concepts of risk
and probability and the increasing
exposure to statistics and under garage
and post-graduation has it made much of
a difference let me jump ahead when
doctors offer a prescriptive drug or a
screening test to large numbers vaison
with asymptomatic people they're doing
something quite different from treating
a patient who has sought help because
she is sick there are known so much
doctors as life insurance sales people
peddling deferred benefits in exchange
for small ongoing inconvenience and cost
in this new kind of medicine not
understanding the risk is a quotient of
not knowing about the circulation of
blood give any common there can you yeah
I think that what you're stating there
and what you're you know the concept is
really what's plagued medicine since for
the last hundred years at least and that
is this struggle between human intuition
and in the power of data and I tried to
show that through the in the book
through the development of this
procedure called the radical mastectomy
for breast cancer and the struggle you
know this ongoing struggle between
clinical trial data and a physician's
intuition there's a quote by Hippocrates
back a way back that was the value of a
physicians intuition is greater than any
measurement and that sort of guiding
doctrine from Hippocrates himself is
really what's what's characterized
medicine for most of the you know the
night in the 1920s century and and when
when he made that statement of course
medicine you know was in the dark ages
we had
like purging and leeching and things
like that and medicine was really a
mystical type of practice it took a long
time for the data to really come in fact
the first randomized controlled trial
the gold standard for measuring the
therapy's effectiveness was done in the
40s it took a long time for medicine to
catch up to the rest of the sciences and
it's still trying to catch up what we've
done is we've built this culture of
medicine where we value a doctor's
intuition over everything else and
what's happened is the complexity of
medicine has just outstripped any single
human mind ability to do it effectively
and so I completely agree with what that
statement you know the concept behind
that statement as doctors have this sort
of statistical blind spot and the way we
need to fix that is we need to have we
need to have a framework or a system
that doctors operate within that guides
them in these critical evaluations of
risk reward absolute risk versus
relative risk and so forth and there's
examples of that happening that I tried
to give in the book but I think you know
as a general strategy that's where we
need to go and I guess you're looking
for awhile call absolute truth in terms
of number crunching but don't you think
there is great incentive pressure that
will co-opt the results of such systems
oh of course yeah and that will be the
you know I guess the battlefront of this
health care reform is that's always that
the struggle is the money part and but
if there's anything we vet we've really
underestimated I think for the 20th
century it's human incentives and how
powerful extraordinarily powerful they
are and that is one of the biggest you
know problems dogging healthcare right
now is we have this crazy
fee-for-service system where we pay
doctors for every procedure and you know
operation every prescription and so
forth and this incentivizes them of
course to over treat and that's one of
the biggest problems in healthcare is we
have about 30 percent of all healthcare
dispensed is over treatment so we need
to reinstate some care systems
doing this right way they put doctors on
salary and then the data is very clear
it shows doctors that are on salary
immediately changed the way they
practice medicine
now they focus on what the patient needs
and so for example the market you know
tends to solve these problems quicker
than than any institution for example
Walmart has noticed this and if they
have if they self insure if they have a
employee that's got back pain they will
fly them to the Mayo Clinic and have
them go there instead because at the
Mayo Clinic where doctors are in salary
if they don't need an operation they
won't get one so yeah I think it's
centers are a huge part of this it
reminds me brad Perkins who was a former
chief medical officer human longevity
incorporated he stated let me find you a
quote from the first hyper well-being
event medicine has traditionally been a
clinical science that's been supported
by data we're rapidly approaching a time
when medicine is about to become a data
science supported by clinicians and then
he I invited him as first guest on to
this podcast and then he stayed and let
me quote him again medicine today is
qualitative clinical practice and you
know there's the only word I'm
comfortable with among these three is
the clinical part I'm very uncomfortable
with qualitative being applied to these
kinds of high-risk decisions that
physicians are making on behalf of
individuals and certainly practice is a
suspicious term as well any thoughts or
comments there yeah what that reminds me
of is something in the book with
qualitative versus you know absolute
data and how deceptive the human mind
can be and the example that just popped
into my mind was in the 1980s there was
two treatments for lung cancer there was
surgery and radiation and surgery
offered a better a better outcome
however it came with a 10% risk of death
over the radiation but if the if the
oncologist presented these two options
to a patient if the oncologist presented
the option and said surgery has a better
chance of extending your life however it
comes with a
percent risk of death only 50% of the
patients opted for surgery however if
the oncologists presented it and said
surgery will has a better chance of
extending your life and there's a 90%
chance you'll survive then about 85% of
the patients chose surgery so you yeah
the qualitative part of medicine you can
see is very pronounced it's just these
these decisions these life death
decisions it should be based on purely
rational data objective data are often
influenced just by our own cognitive
bias and how dr. frames things you
remind me there of the book nudge by
Richard Fowler are you aware of the book
haha no I'm not okay so it's called
nudge improving decisions about health
wealth and happiness
you mentioned the societal systems are
being improved with better
decision-making with correction for the
failings of the human mind which is why
you what dollars book there's a button
however health care is not and in this
way your book is saying details the
direction of what should happen yeah I
think ironically the health care is
increasingly divergent from our
individual health it's increasingly not
aligned with our health it's an absurd
situation where our most valuable asset
isn't adequately protected by the
institution forum lines to do so and
anybody who's unsure should read
Elizabeth Rosenthal's an American
sickness do you really think it can be
fixed yeah I do I'm optimistic about
about that Lee and and the reason is is
because you talked about you gave it
there is a lot of societal Rena's of
human activity that are being improved
by the system's approach they're
becoming remarkably efficient and of
course medicine is lagged but because of
our system because we're not uniform you
see these pockets of brilliant and it's
always been the doctrine in fact it's
it's kind of written in the law that a
hospital or a clinic has got to remain
this kind of inert framework for
that allows doctors to practice medicine
within so they're designed to be
invisible a hospital and so forth and
this you know you can't even
incorporations can't impinge on this
it's called the corporate practice of
medicine we have to stay completely
clear of doctor decision-making and
there was good reasons for this
initially when a doctor had a good grasp
of all you know the treatments that were
available but now because of this
complexity it becomes so much more
imperative to have the system be a
dynamic partner with the doctor to guide
them to pull data from the electronic
medical records and show them the best
practices and there's a brilliant
example this of health care chain called
Intermountain Healthcare in Utah and the
the the guide driving this his name's
Brett James he's a statistician he's
also an MD and a surgeon and what James
has done is he's made the the system
part of the practice so he will look at
the the electronic medical records and
notice where there's a variation in
treatment for example he noticed that
it's always been known that antibiotics
given near the time of surgery help
prevent surgical infections however has
never known the optimal time so he
looked at the medical records and he saw
that his surgeons indeed were giving
antibiotics you know at different times
way before surgery 24 hours before
surgery sometimes immediately before
sometimes 24 or 48 hours after so what
he did is he just had them continue that
in in groups and then he just measured
the outcomes in his medical record
system and found out that if you give
antibiotics two hours right before the
first incision you had much greater
outcomes so this cut the rate of
surgical infections in half and you just
go on and on down the list of the
process improvements that they've done
at Intermountain and it's you know it's
incredibly dramatic these equate to
thousands of lives saved and billions of
dollars saved and when you look at
Intermountain system if you applied that
to the rest of the United States the way
they've done it it would immediately
drop a result in about a 40% reduction
in healthcare costs so this would
essentially solve our crisis
we just adopted this system and did it
the right way I've no look to
Intermountain I immediately wonder how
they make money from doing what you just
described you know it's it's that's a
great question and they do take hits
because they do do it the right way so
they're not incentivized by overt rimae
and so forth they put their doctors on
salary for example however because
they're so efficient they save money in
other ways and brett-james often brings
us up you know if you do this the right
way you you you maintain margins enough
that you can that you can continue to
operate I haven't shared with you yet
because we've not spoken before I
believe that given enough time that what
we call health care today will be
ring-fence
to acute care i something major went
wrong or an injury and with the speed of
machines going forwards
you know the semiconductor industry
generally the democracy of the data
processing industry I eat chips an
associate networking sensors and up in
hands of consumers the prediction
prevention and optimization including
lifespan extension will fall under a
secondary system that I now see emergent
well I mentioned I've been calling
wellness as a service any thoughts
I've always noticed in healthcare is
sort of this absurd bifurcation of how
we approach treating disease and what I
mean by that is we divide up all these
disease process and try to try to fix
them once they it's manifested it's very
obvious that if you try to get to the
source and use a preventive type of
medicine you could make much much more
progress now that that's easy to say and
we just give you an example how that
doesn't work sometimes we always thought
that if you could diagnose cancer
earlier you could fix it you'd have this
chance to do better to fix it before to
Kyra before it manifested as a you know
a malignant disease and we've gotten
better at it for example for thyroid
cancer we've tripled the number of early
detection x' however the death rates
haven't budged
and so when you clearly look at the data
what's happened has gotten very good at
finding masses finding
sort of markers that are indicative of
precancerous things however most of
these tumors turn out to be not a threat
they turned out to be very benign and so
what happens then is these patients will
be aware that they have a mass or
something up high PSA and they'll demand
treatment or the doctor will offer
treatment so you get a tremendous amount
of unnecessary cancer treatment on early
detection so you get this massive block
of over treatment without a constant
constant increase in outcome and death
rates so that's an example of how you if
you do preventative medicine you have to
do it the right way you have to be you
have to have a some sort of therapy
that's proportional to you know an early
detection type scenario rather than
chemo or radiation and so forth however
you know that that's not that's one
example but I think for if you were able
to cure cancer tomorrow or
cardiovascular disease it would equate
to something like 2 to 3 years increase
in lifespan that's you know that's not
as much as most people think so the the
problem there is what happens is an
aging body is you just get a buildup of
problems and they the next problem is
waiting in line so I think you're
absolutely right we need to focus on
wellness on preventive medicine drugs it
actually things like you know dietary
lifestyle things metformin is an
extraordinarily interesting drug to
apply in a preventative mindset for
cardiovascular cancer in just the aging
process in general so I think that that
is where medicine needs to go just
because the the the bang for your buck I
guess is so much so much better than
trying to treat continuously trying to
treat problems after they manifest yeah
I'm quite keen to jump to metformin I
had a decision to make a couple months
ago to start taking metformin or
berberine and I decided hey I'm gonna
play with berberine first since
everybody's jumping on metformin I'm
just playing as usual I test all kinds
of most molecular agents and myself and
do blood draws frequently anyway yeah I
take I take med Foreman as well and
I'm 47 I just turned 48 actually and
yeah it made when you look at the data
it makes a ton of sense the data that
really struck me was they looked at I
believe was 70,000 patients with type 2
diabetes compared to healthy match
controls I think the control group was
over 90,000 and the diabetic population
on metformin lived longer than the
healthy population so that's pretty
pretty compelling data that this you
know is real anti-aging therapy yeah you
recently read David's and Claire's
lifespan book but when I looked up yeah
the studies the my swirl was obese or
sick or elderly or on a standard
American diet I couldn't help but wonder
and not only is it Mike's but what if it
was individuals who are eating a
ketogenic diet say an ancestral diet and
they're doing 5 day water fast
occasionally etc that's a great question
and that that since then metformin has
been shown to improve lifespan of
healthy mice resveratrol is one that's
really you know I think it only applied
in obese and aged mice yeah I also
started taking resveratrol this year but
now I'm going to switch to a fancier
micro version but I looked at berberine
as I mentioned and it seemed to have
less side effects on more positives in
the allegedly are a larger impact on on
lipids I'm still doing testing I've got
40 days left and then I'll switch over
to my gram of metformin pretty anyway
jumping back to what you were saying is
the so what you're effectively were
seing is as far as I understand and put
another way is a all men when they die I
have prostate cancer yeah I think that's
correct I'm not sure it's a hundred
percent of men but I think it's the vast
majority including you know micro tumors
throughout our bodies we are we are
actively as we age you know having this
never-ending battle between between
tumorigenesis and and our immune systems
and so forth and I guess that you know
what's really important is the ability
to recognize when it becomes a threat
and and or how do you treat so example
say you have a high PSA and the date on
this is really kind of phenomenal it's
actually patients that are diagnosed
with prostate cancer from a high PSA
have a 47 times greater chance of being
treated so chemo radiation biopsies and
so forth by invasive treatments then
they are to have their life extended so
what's that what that means is you have
to over treat a lot of people before you
treat the ones where you actually makes
a difference and so we need to get good
we need to just get better at
determining when what to do in those
scenarios and I think this is where
metformin ketogenic diets sort of
fasting these these therapies that are
so low risk and you know probably have a
benefit of changing your health in other
ways extending your life as well become
that seems like a much more proportional
response to these early detection zhh
than the traditional way of biopsies and
chemo and so forth so there's one thing
I liked about your book which also
excite tomorrow the audible one is
already out so I had a listen so I like
the fact is you know I'm pushing the
prediction prevention angle and as you
point out there more treatment and early
detection isn't always better you need
to be very careful and there's also the
issue of the worried well and in other
words you start creating a lot more
traffic of people performing imaging and
biopsies and so on who would have been
better just having non pain aware and
left it but I guess we you're a I'm
laughing by the way in part not just
because of that but because I haven't
even got to discuss in later parts of
your book where I'm still in the first
part here I feel we could chat all day
so I guess what you're saying is you
want to see quantified treatment optimal
treatment a surgery or know an if
surgery to have access to evidence-based
systems for those decisions
but what by optimization like anti-aging
outcomes as we discussed surely
prediction prevention is a data
processing task it's not like a typical
doctor white coat drug dispensary milk
in the knee with a hammer type tusk yeah
that's that's correct
going back to these sort of you know
these these guiding data what you do in
certain situations and why this is so
difficult for doctors these days is
because there are so many procedures now
and what happens is you establish as a
procedure is effective but then the
science or the stops and you don't get
the next level of data about comparing a
procedure to a different procedure or
when to apply it and the best time to
apply it in the example I used in the
book for that was prostate cancer with
early detection you have five treatment
options you have watch and wait you have
surgery and then you have three forms of
radiation sort of standard radiation and
then at the high end of this new proton
beam radiation and the proton beam
radiation cost a hundred thousand
dollars and the watch and wait cost a
few thousand dollars
none of these treatments have been
compared to each other and doctors don't
know which one is best in that scenario
but under a fee-for-service payment
system you can guess which one's getting
prescribed the most that the you know a
hundred thousand dollar treatment and
you can see this in in many many things
in medicine I use the example of the
radical mastectomy which went on for 50
years and brutalized women and was based
on a seductive sort of seductive proof
or sigmav idea the cancer spreading in
this slow centrifugal manner and the
further out you cut the the better
chance a woman had a survival but then
when they finally did the clinical trial
and compared it to a simple mastectomy
who was shown to be no better and
there's many things like that today last
year they just showed for the first time
that women with hormone positive hair to
negative breast cancer it's McCobb
common form I believe that adjunct of
chemotherapy after surgery is of no
benefit
so now thousands of women can be spared
chemotherapy with all of its caustic
side-effects just because they finally
did this big NIH study to show that it
had no effect so yeah you know
optimizing and figure out figuring out
when and how to apply these treatments
and when are the best you know which
ones are the best is still a fluid kind
of ongoing process and we could do so
much better if we just captured all that
data like they do at Intermountain all
the time I like the fact you have a
solid reference example and
Intermountain and the also to start with
the book you you remind me that you
mentioned
Amazon and JP Chase and Berkshire have
done in creating their own should we
call the health care company and I quote
the parasite of health care dragging
their companies down relative to the
rest of the world could you introduce
your spree flea while I'm sewing JP
Jason Berkshire doing them just briefly
why it's very clear what they're doing
you know the data's is right there for
anyone to look at American healthcare
most industrialized nations leveled off
at about eleven percent per GDP we just
kept going and we're now we're I think
18 and still rapidly rising so this is a
massive chunk of our of our GDP that
we're siphoning off for health care
compared to the rest of the world which
by the way have better outcomes better
lifespan that our infant mortality less
anxiety because every most people are
insured we leave so many such a
substantial proportion of our population
uninsured so they're just doing it
better in this cost it costs our
businesses and that that trio what they
noticed is you know that operate on a
global scale
it just makes America less competitive
we have to pay out so much more money
per employee in health care compared to
the rest of the world it's we become
less and less competitive and it's
harder to do business so what they
decided to do you know briefly is just
create their own health care system from
the inside and see if they could do it
better capitalize on all these system
improvements that we're talking about
use the examples that are
working like Intermountain and see if
they can build this framework from
within and and have it operate more
efficiently so I use that as kind of a
narrative throughout the book to to to
watch into this sort of you know ongoing
story because the one of the company's
evolved berkshire hathaway those guys
have been money balling financial
markets you know since the sense for
most of the twentieth century so that
that was why i kind of use that as a
narrative arc throughout the book i
appreciate it if I jump to chapter two
I've trying to speed myself up here
chapter two which is called how
healthcare become a culture of
inefficiency my favorite quote from that
chapter was Medicine has been built on
the autonomy of the physicians venerated
intuition but something more is required
still today medicine is more closely
resembles a culture than it does a
logically structured evidence-based
system a culture an extra Cobley shackle
to the file ability for the human mind
with its myriad of biases so what you're
saying is health care needs to become
data-driven predictive analytics
multivariate causation analysis via AI
or this is your point exactly yeah and I
think you know with those are all the
things we've talked about about how
Intermountain and places like Geisinger
Kaiser they're these examples of what we
do what you just that quote references
about how to how to diminish the fal
ability of the human mind how to where
the system can effectively you know sort
of put a noose around where doctors are
making a mistake then we did that's how
we improve and this does not mean we
need to diminish a doctor's intuition
this just means that we wrap data around
you know give them these data guideline
to where they can then they can focus
more in the human part of medicine and
use their intuition in other ways well
you stay the the uncomfortable truth is
that there are many procedure with only
a thin evidence to support them and that
they persist because of tradition rather
than evidence-based knowledge but don't
they persist because there's money then
patients are in
durable powerless position from that
item indeed I mean surely it's simply an
expression of apex of capitalism in the
protocols of capitalism of being running
for a couple hundred years I mean it's
not because I'm really a biases of the
mind is is underlying protocols have
been magnified by a global system and
will continue to grow exponentially yeah
that's very true I think I think it's
really both I think it's biases and it's
these you know capitalistic incentives
and that the example I use in the book
was McAllen Texas where people notice
that they were utilizing Medicare about
twice the rate as the rest of the
country so they were paying out about
$15,000 per Medicare recipient compared
to the rest of the US which is about
$7,000 and so what an author journalist
Atul Gawande he went down there
he wrote actually wrote in New Yorker
piece about this he wrote down there and
find out why and when he found out when
he dug deep into this it was simply a
culture of entrepreneurship that the
doctors had developed so in other words
these doctors were buying strip malls
real estate they were competing with
each other you know and that just
escalated into this you know horrible
system of fraud over treatment and you
know kickbacks all these things were
going on and when after he wrote this
article in The New Yorker the the the
regulators came down on this place hard
and it really had changed and you can
see the utilization rates have dropped
substantially so just fine you know
Charlie Munger said that one of the
worst things you can do it then it can
happen to a capitalistic society is
fraud allow fraud to continue to
propagate so if you can find these and
shine a light on them you know you can
effect change if the economy is known to
support health wellness and well-being
then what was an economy for and I keep
persisting with that question and nobody
seems to give me an answer and it
appears to me that the economy may be up
until I don't know 40 50 years ago did
track some well well with well-being you
know had enough calories furniture
so um but once we had enough calories
and items and material goods it's often
more and more perpetuating creating
problems for it to solve for example
obesity yeah that's an interesting way
to look at it and and I think you're
right you know once these basic problems
have solved we're in a unique position
to really examine what what what what
we're doing what everything else means
and how we improve and what what
accounts for a good life and and that is
inexorably shackled to health and you
know I think that's gets undervalued in
our society you we just accept aging and
a decaying body and all these things as
inevitable but you know in truth that
what is what makes a life worth living
is the maintenance of health and
preventing all these things so I think
you know Lee I'm optimistic I see as I
was writing this book too what you see
is these changes that are being effect
you see the old health care system is
kind of this legacy system it's like Ma
Bell you know corded phones it
eventually just dies off and gets
replaced by the next best technology and
you see that in health care you see
these bubbling sort of percolating
pockets of innovation these small
boutique health systems that are doing
things so much better for the health as
an example they just do a strict dietary
regimen for type 2 diabetes online it's
a ketogenic diet it's online coaching
and it's a value-based payment system so
if they don't achieve outcomes for
insured patients they don't get paid so
I do see the economy the market system
really evolving to solve a lot of these
problems it's slower than we'd like but
it's definitely happening to indicate
the vastness of the problem Victor
Chapelle oh how I'll link to him in the
show notes
he said the the fast food industry for
each dollar it makes ends up costing
three dollars in healthcare to fix what
it did on the great majority of
Americans and British are eating out I
mean most calories are food that has
been eaten
so if with this model were they're
making a dollar only for it then to cost
a dollar to try to fix what has happened
in health care system I have hope in
crypto currency and I wish I could get a
little bit more time in that space
I was looking helping a company with an
ICO and that's where my optimism came
from I think money is is it's also at
you it's undergoing a revolution and I
think that'll conspire with this need
for health wellness and well-being so
yeah the the crypto space and we
mentioned the procedures get
institutionalized so for example stents
are overused like one in ten stents are
not needed so over a utilization of
procedures as a horrific figure one
tonne yeah I mean though the over
utilization is truly horrific in general
one intense stance you know cancer care
treatments again tons of over treatment
there was an interesting story that I
dug up and it occurred in Redding
California where it was for bypass
surgery and any patients that were
admitted to this this Institute and
Redding if they had the slightest
perceived abnormality and their cardiac
vessels they were shuffled off to to
bypass surgery and you know what
happened was his culture developed where
this sort of colleague colleague
reinforcements they were operating on
more and more healthy people so their
outcomes looked better and they just
sort of propagated this belief that they
were doing the patient's a favor now
this is an example of all over
utilization you know without the money
being the driving component and so once
the regulators and the media got word of
this you know they came down on him like
a hammer they're fine I think half of
500 million dollars but when you look
deeper you found out they truly didn't
believe they were doing anything wrong
they thought this was in the patient's
best interest so you see the all kinds
sort of rationale behind this
overtreatment problem you know I think
Mark Twain's old adage that every for a
guy with a Hammer Every Problem looks
like a nail I think doctors have a
desire to fix and so there's a general
tendency to try to prescribe to you no
antibiotics statins surgery they're
trying to fix patients when in fact you
know it's been known since the times of
Voltaire I think Voltaire is quote was a
physician the art of practicing medicine
is nothing more than amusing the patient
while nature cures the disease and
William holster who started one of the
founding fathers of Johns Hopkins stated
practicing medicine as teaching the
masses not to take medication so you
know it's been known for a long time
that that medicine is not perfect and it
rare you know there are great cases
where it can solve problems and save
lives but this over treatment problem is
a human bias and we just need to
recognize that in Institute ways that to
not do I personally would like to see
consumer apps which guide you in terms
of knowing what your choices are so if
you have a particular cancer you know it
takes it instead of what you mentioned
is in the physician is in the surgeon
having access to predictive analytics
etc I would like to see that all the way
to the consumer for treatment options
thoughts yeah and I think that's where
it's going you know with wearable
devices and systems biology you know
we're getting so good at being able to
just pull out data on individuals and
see trends over time that I think that
medicine is heading that Ridge it's not
a consumer market health care you know
you're already in a deeply vulnerable
position
an acute position it's not like shopping
around the mall no it's it's there's
nothing worse you know I don't know
about you but I hate going to any clinic
sitting in the waiting room the whole
process is just dehumanizing and I just
prefer to stay out of the system
altogether if you can I work on
and it's partly why we're talking I must
be 1718 years ago that I last went to
doctor and that was for a checkup and he
over a lot of study a lot of time I have
I have learned the or came to the belief
that seems to be backed by continuous
forms of testing that the best action I
think you can take for health and we'll
discuss this a little later on if
there's okay is the food that you eat so
a cookbook is probably preference and
because preferential to Witter is
virtual
that has been my conclusion and being my
foundation of the pyramid then
supplements ordinary supplements you
know is a magnesium and so on then if
you've got that two bases perfect then
out on some auntie agent it's not just
over treatment you speak about in the
book you speak about the extreme
variation so for example tiny ICU than
the life and some parts of country you
might see a tea specialist and other
parts eighteen what's kind of crazy is
people who were in areas where there is
less care and therefore receive less
care it doesn't seem to be a bad thing
in fact the population is not worse for
it
they don't have lower rates of survival
and your explanation is a medical
intervention be it surgery chemo scans
drugs they'll carry risk so when you
over treat you introduce risk and
alarmingly you state that physicians are
not made aware of their patterns of
practice so they don't even know that
they're over treating or using an
updated procedure yeah yeah variation in
treatment is not something that's taught
in medical school and the scope of the
problem is kind of underappreciated and
and you know the data is good at just
pulling that out you can see it it's
just everywhere so within the same
clinic you can have one doctor
prescribed twice the number of scans is
another doctor the rates of back surgery
from County to County and Washington
vary but I think 15 times
from cities less than 50 miles away you
can have you know three times a stent
put in in one city compared to the next
city so it's just everywhere I mean this
is open I mean I almost speechless yes
I've heard it from a number of sources
but how that's allowed to continue we're
not talking about minor inconveniences
here we're talking about people's lives
are very well being they're functioning
their health their families or extended
families their wealth etc I mean I'm
what is it half a million Americans are
going bankrupt each year because of
health care costs yeah why didn't I
think it's one in five Americans have
medical debt now it the scope of this
problem is is really underappreciated
you know this is a three over three
trial trillion dollar a year industry
and the American you know we are bearing
the brunt of this over treatment and
yeah it's you know it's rampant and I
don't that that's the that's the front
lines of health care is how do we bring
down these costs and unfortunately you
know I think we have to have a crisis
before we act you know it was really
telling us when I was writing the book
right in the throes of the subprime
crisis of 2009 you know the stock market
was crashing the finance system was
melting down you know Obama was asked
what's the biggest problem and American
economics and he said it's not even
close its health care so I think you
know the people that are on the inside
that see these numbers realize the scope
of this problem that's it's bankrupting
our country thirteen percent of
dispensed healthcare is not necessary
you say in the book and that yeah that's
the number that's thrown around I've
seen higher numbers I've seen numbers as
high as 50% when you add in fraud and
all you know do full cost accounting and
not just over treatment the number is
I've seen as high as 50% you say the
globally after cancer and heart disease
the third largest cause of death is
prescribing medications yeah that's
correct
yeah drug interactions
or prescriptions of medications that
that's a huge huge problem and you know
because it is such a large industry with
so many people the numbers are
staggering medical air I think we lose
200,000 people a year to medical air
I saw stat that I can't remember which
year was fairly recently but 7,000
people died from sloppy physician
handwriting alone you know you when you
see the the number of people that engage
the system with all of its in
efficiencies these numbers are our mind
block and it also is clear at border I
wouldn't say even borders I have to say
if you've got any moral compass it is
evil when you get to parts of the book
when for example you stayed over 50% of
patients with advanced cancers receive
chemotherapy in their final months even
though the chance of extending life is
exceedingly small and then you want to
say study after study shows the end of
life chemo degrades a little time people
have left and there's nothing to extend
life I mean III can't excuse a beyond
the label evil thoughts yeah
and and I I you know that's what the
Berkshire Hathaway is you know the two
leaders of that company are Warren
Buffett and Charlie Munger and Charlie
Munger used the word evil as well about
that over treatment towards the end of
life with chemotherapy and when I when I
researched that I became a little more
sympathetic for the doctors position
simply because patients are don't want
to give up and their families don't want
to give up and oftentimes they're the
ones that don't want to give up and want
this sort of Hail Mary treatment all the
way to the end doctors could certainly
do a better job of of you know relaying
their position and perhaps not even
doing it or you know giving them a
rationale not to do it and the data
shows that when you really engage
patients with end-stage cancer when you
give them palliative care support staff
nursing engage doctors they and and
really confront this idea of death they
take less treatment at the
and substantially less and they live
longer yeah that's interesting they live
longer taking less yeah well right when
you think about a failing body you know
pouring chemotherapy into it at the very
end is probably gonna it's not gonna
help it's just gonna hasten the process
of death so you just want these people
to have the best end of life where
they're where they're clear they feel
good they can you know talk to their
loved ones and the chemotherapy at the
very end is not the right way one of the
major structural problems that praise
the private insurance took over paying
for the cost of drugs and drugs as you
state in the book exploded after World
War two because the consumers became
disintermediate from the price of the
drugs I buy insurance in the middle
there is nothing - there is the market
can't be kept in check so as you state
devices medication and other treatments
have skyrocket and cost yeah that's one
of the biggest problems I think in
healthcare is just this this sort of
disassociation from the way capital
markets traditionally work where you
have consumers that you know measure the
cost and effectiveness of the procedure
and then rationally make a decision to
you know if it's worth it or not when
you're put in an extraordinarily
vulnerable situation you know you have
heart disease you have cancer any number
of conditions and the doctors telling
you this is the best treatment you don't
should price shop you know you don't
question that you just you do it
especially when the cost is hidden an
insurance premium so that's why you see
this sort of ratcheting effect of why
this escalation has happened in our
country and some of these new cancer
treatments that are coming out now karti
immunotherapies for example are costing
about half a million dollars five
hundred thousand dollars for a treatment
so this is this is where you get to the
point where you have no choice but to
allocate healthcare you're gonna have to
pick and choose who gets those
treatments so I you know the this again
takes you away from or takes you to this
point of trying to find these
undervalued treatments in health care
and that's what I try to look at in the
second
sort of the book is how can you what are
what's sitting right in front of us that
we could do right now that's you know
very cheap or essentially free to change
outcomes and there's a whole lot of
things because the market is not set up
to recognize those things
yeah that's chapter three which is how
simple and effective treatments get lost
and so you state the they're the usually
off target effects are observed decades
later but then Pharma has a little
incentive to carry out trials of patent
you may wish to say well off target
means and why drugs end up off patent on
what generic drugs mean and then maybe
he could give an example with metformin
yeah yes so the traditionally what
happens is you know once a
pharmaceutical company recognizes
potential in a drug they ushered through
phase one to three clinical trials this
cost nowadays it cost about a billion
dollars and then though informal
approval by the FDA or whatever
regulatory body for that disease and
then they'd be you know then the the
pharmaceutical sales network goes off
and knocks on the doors of doctors
offices and tells them the virtues of
this medication for them to prescribe it
what happens then is over time these
drugs lose their patent protection and
they become generic drugs and by that
time typically we've captured way more
data so you've been able to look at
these drugs in action in big chunks of
the population over long periods of time
decades and decades and so often what
you find out is you'll see that they're
useful for another disease indication
and the pharmacological you know
rationale behind this is very
explainable most of these small molecule
drugs affect about seven different
molecular pathways within the cell
yet they're only indicated for one so
you'll often get this sort of fortuitous
side effect if you will where they're
treating another disease process and
this is what we call off-label off-label
use so generic drugs get used off-label
a lot in the example metformin it's it's
indicated for type two diabetes so
that's what it has FDA approval for but
because there's
massive blocks of data of people have
noticed that it's really reducing
cardiovascular disease risk it's
reducing it's improving cancer outcomes
in a variety of different cancers but
now all of a sudden there's no incentive
for doctors to prescribe this in fact
there's a disincentive because off-label
comes with sort of career risk it's not
doesn't have a formal approval by a
regular to our body so a doctor is going
out on a limb by prescribing off-label
even though the you know the risk is
minimal so this is just another example
about how this misguided incentive
system leads to these tremendously
undervalued mispriced therapies in our
system it reminds me of Joseph Anton who
introduced me to aunty agent he was one
of the early guests on the show and in
the book you stay the slight attenuation
of the aging process benefit society the
2013 economic analysis showed the by
slowing age-related diseases by only 20%
would save 7 trillion dollars in the USA
alone over the next 50 years and yet the
FDA couldn't go ahead and with a trial
for metformin for agent could you
briefly explain why yep yeah we touched
on that earlier about how we sort of
have this kind of upside down and
backwards approach to medicine where we
just wait till disease has manifested
and then we try to fix it which is it
you know that that is a terrible
strategy so met again metformin has been
shown and almost every multicellular
creature it's been tested and to extend
lifespan and increase health span so in
other words a lot of the problems we
develop as we age like increasing
insulin resistance pre-diabetes
cardiovascular risk it's able to
attenuate almost all of those problems
so there there was a trial called the
tame trial that would finally do the you
know test metformin and healthy adults
and see what we could do see how much
risk we could mitigate how we could
increase health span and lifespan in
this healthy
population as they age and you know the
government apparently had no interest in
funding this yet this is the perfect
kind of place for government to step in
because this is a five cent pill it's
almost free and this could benefit the
entire society it's like the interstate
highway system no one else is really
going to do this besides government and
they should because it's their citizens
our well-being that there should be
responsible for at the time I wrote the
book it was not funded now however I
think a very philanthropic private donor
has stepped in to fund this trial
finally I think it's gonna cost about 60
million yeah the the benefits of that if
we can attenuate things like type-2
diabetes which now 1 in 10 American
adults over half of America Delta
mericans have either pre-diabetes or
type 2 diabetes and the cost of that
disease is incredible it's a pernicious
disease and you know results in nerve
damage all kinds of ancillary problems
and healthcare costs over time so if we
can you know attenuate this with a
five-cent pill it that is health care at
its best now that doesn't mean we should
ignore lifestyle and dietary changes you
just take this bill of course not
but it's you know it's it's a first step
I agree and also there's other cheap
treatments like water fasting or the
ketogenic diet also highly effective
they they're not going to find a place
because we're where would the money come
from and prescribing water fasting yeah
yeah that that's an interesting one and
just say about a 48 to 72 hour water
fast before chemotherapy has been shown
across the board to dramatically
diminish side effects and there's very
good you know cellular mechanistic
reasons why this is happening when you
when you fast you go into this ketogenic
state and what happens when you switch
over to burning ketones as a fuel your
healthy cells are made much more robust
so you you really you produce much more
glutathione and antioxidants
in your healthy cells there with able to
withstand chemotherapy much better and
and on the converse when you do this
cancer cells are made much more
vulnerable because you've switched them
away from a fuel that they love blood
glucose to this different field ketones
that they have trouble metabolizing so
you not only do you see a diminishment
and side-effects then from from these
patients undergoing chemotherapy but you
see improved outcomes and this is all
from just not eating it's funny the
doctor that published this data I'm
sorry he's a PhD you had a really hard
time getting oncologist to sign on to
this you know he they just are they
they're loath have somebody not eat and
they'd you know they don't want them
weakened then they have all these
excuses and reasons why they think it's
a terrible idea
but if eventually he convinced enough of
them to do this small trial and the
outcomes were dramatic I mean you saw
objective measures of chemotherapy side
effects vomiting you know patients that
didn't fast vomited throughout the day
where the patients that that did fast
almost it almost went to zero so these
are you know these are it's simple
extraordinarily simple it doesn't get
any cheaper than not eating yet there's
very because of the way the system is
set up incentive wise there's a little
incentive to study these things and
hopefully one day when you have an app
on your phone they can point out these
treatments and give you data on efficacy
I think the consumer will you know a
much more powerful position yeah just
just you know knowledge is power just
presenting this to patients so you don't
have to be a patient you don't have to
be sick first also you know eventually
what we need would the will be whole
economy based around helping you take an
actionable step every moment of your
life should you wish to do so
people of got X number of dollars per
month they'll commit to health and you
might as well commit it to not getting
sick or feeling more well and so when
people wish to spend you need something
very individualized that says hey to
take action and what is the best bang
for buck action at the moment it's a
Wild West market like consumer genomic
test
my gut
blood to us people are lost and
searching but that will get formalized
it's a bit like being able to search via
kayak for airline cause I mean to be
able to rank the airline's
by cost there will be an economy that's
what we'll call search engines in place
that will guide you individually each
step of your life I mean on a daily
basis should you wish for whatever
capacity of spending and time that you
have to move your health forwards
because health is a continuum it's not
binary so especially with the the
generation now I think the previous
generation looked after their cars more
and took their car for servicing and
resented spending on their bodies but I
think we see the the result of that now
yeah that's that's a utopian you know I
I I love that idea that that's a good
analogy with the way people approach
health well you know in the 50s over
half of I think adults smoked and we've
come a long way since then and you see
this with care oncology it's we switched
to a telemedicine platform because the
the drugs that are prescribed these
repurposed drugs are very safe and you
know it's clinically very manageable you
can do it remotely and when you remove
these barriers for people so now you
know they don't have to find someone to
watch their kids they don't to take time
off work to go to and sit in a waiting
room and see a doctor you know they can
sit in their pajamas and just interface
with a doctor online and so we're you
know we're seeing technology kind of
remove some of these barriers that
people have these traditional barriers
to engaging in healthcare we need not
just a transport like the healthcare
mark is extremely opaque you know the
cost depends on the postcode for the
same procedure and you know that that's
ludicrous but we need to get to not just
making that transparent I you proceed
you're a treatment but when people are
not sick in fact half the population is
sick without knowing it they've got a
serious nutrient deficiency or something
lurking that's not good
and certainly any healthy people I've
taken to the blood lab have something
missing it seems more like a hundred
percent they have something wrong and
people want to protect their health so
you need a market where people can
invest a certain amount of time and
money and get unknown outcome at the
moment it just hit and miss and guesses
and too often people end up with the
functional medicine doctors trying to
get a resolution and I prefer to even
avoid functional medicine doctors in
first place because at the moment people
are spending on their phone and apps but
I people are going to be spending on
anti-aging on longevity and extending
their life is going to be a quite
sizable monthly fee people are generally
paying on a subscription basis for them
and their family and on 100 percent sure
it's gonna be a trillion dollar market
minimum within a decade I think you're
right you know I haven't thought about
you know this sort of incorporation into
healthcare but that makes beautiful
sense I can imagine a future where you
know you're getting genomic readouts and
you can incorporate you know you can see
I have a have a data analyze and see
where you're deficient what you should
do all of these things from your home
yeah I've been tracking companies doing
pieces of this in different spaces for
four years now
I'm actually working in a book on this
topic I won't divert it with him your
book I know it's a time here so let me
just jump on to chapter five and to
speed up here chapter five is nature or
nurture what really matters my favorite
quote from this chapter hopefully I'm
quoting the okay here has came from
notable only a few decades ago the vast
majority of biologists would have
claimed an individual's fate lay in the
genes inherited from his or her mother
or father but recent studies have shown
that the genes we inherit play a lesser
role in our destiny only approximately
20% of our lifespan is hardwired into us
by heritable genes alone or nature
conversely this means that roughly
80% of our longevity is determined by
lifestyle and chance events or nurture
so genes are not our destiny could you
and this is a hard one do briefly
briefly introduce epigenetics you know
the whole sort of janaba genome is hard
where epigenome is software you can
mention how they're switched on and off
and if he wanted to give an example in
the book you mentioned by d3 I think and
mean something for lunch just a brief
interruption to the epigenetics of
people who don't know anything have an
idea of a fluidity inside the hard
wiring yeah yeah yeah that's been quite
a transition in biology
after we sweet sequenced the the
majority of the human genome in 2000 and
Clinton announced that it was really
thought that the majority and he quoted
this is a quote that the majority of
disease would be able to be solved now
now that we finally had the hard copy of
what are you know what our genome look
like and at the time the director of the
NIH thought that for example there'd be
about 12 genes related to type 2
diabetes so you fast forward to today
and sequence a genome is down to about
you know a little over $1,000 I think
nowadays I actually did a whole genome
sequence recently for 400 askary rows
that is what we're called call it 500
all and it's amazing where that
technology is gone so on the company
gave me a 43 gig file download I asked
for it yeah yeah this day the data
captures is absolutely credible now but
what what they've learned since then is
it's not there's very little difference
between the genomes between individuals
and there you cannot account for disease
states by genes alone the vast majority
so when you crunch all the numbers what
you find is about 20% of our health and
longevity is determined by the genes you
inherit from your mom and dad and the
majority 80% is determined by what we
call nurture no nurtures a vague term
what does that mean nutrition sleep
chance events all those things but we
never really had an explanation for the
the way that those events translated
into our bodies
how was how did events determine our
health now we know that the way they do
it is through epigenetics so the way you
think of epigenetics is you have 22,000
genes in your genome and epigenetics are
just the cellular mechanisms that turn
the dials the volume control knobs up
and down on those genes so you get that
you'll have the expression or the
translation of a gene turned down or
turned up by epigenetics and these these
events are determined by toxins you're
exposed to by diet by lifestyle by sleep
and by by a lot of things you know by
your relationships a lot of things we
didn't appreciate before in the de fer
the divergence between our epigenome
starts from the moment were born and the
reason we know this is we can the
perfect experimental tool proxy for this
is identical twins so they are perfect
genetic clones of each other but you can
measure their epigenome divergence over
time and this actually starts in utero
one twin might get a little more
placenta blood flow and get a higher
degree of nutrient exchange while
they're growing and so their epigenome
will start to diverge from their perfect
clone right at that you know in utero so
this is really where science has gotten
extraordinarily fascinating and we're
learning so much more about how our you
know how these events correlate to our
do it to our well-being you you you
mentioned social genomics
I got a topic ie I've been taking notes
for a few years for this book I
mentioned I'm working on new state that
your social life eclipses diet and
exercise on your genomics in fact you
stay which lifestyle factors matter the
most over longevity and I think you
mentioned something about four million
people and you say I don't know if it
was a study say there are top two
features strong social connections and
social integration which is amount of
social interaction you have in a day so
do you talk to the Baker
you talk to a fishmonger and I find it
hard to believe it Trump's diet yeah I
did too well yeah yeah I found that
fascinating and I thought you know is
really interesting the the first half of
the book had dedicated so much to data
and how data needs to we need to do
better with data guiding doctor decision
making and then I turned in the book to
our individual health and what this is
the day to say that well perhaps we're
getting wrong what are our own
individual cognitive biases with regard
to our own health care and that's that's
the variables when you look at 'buddy me
illogical and analyze the data what
variables matter the most to our health
and longevity
and the data suggests that these these
two interactions is these social you
know the social interaction you have
throughout the day and the number of
close friends and people you know that
you rely on the most who you ask for a
loan for example those two things matter
the most to our health and they eclipse
diet they Eclipse exercise even smoking
they're more important than than smoking
up to 15 cigarettes a day
so router and pay for blood tests and
they're checking they pull we for gene
for example we should pay for social
events well you need to do it you should
do it all and that you know these
genetic I don't mean to you know these
are data showing the importance of of
that of lifestyle factors over all you
know a statistical analysis of people
for genetics but you certainly need to
know if you have it you know a gene for
Alzheimer's in April you gene or
something else that you could do
something about you know on an
individual level that data is extremely
relevant however as abroad just talking
about the general population yeah that
that is true for the general population
that your integration into society your
engagement with people is
extraordinarily important to your health
it's a very blue zone issue it's very
blue zone ish and that's the one
commonality in blue zones as you see
this dense architecture you see kid
parties you see extended family and and
now we know that the you know this this
fuzzy interface between perceptions so
when you interact with a human being
this perception goes all the weight into
your epigenetics and you look at the
genes involved in your immune system
this is where this seems to Center when
you're socially engaged you see a down
regulation of the immune genes the genes
responsible for inflammation and you see
an upregulation in the genes responsible
for the steering response of adaptive
immunity so you this is why lonely
people have this constant sort of
smouldering inflammation that that
results in you know the tremendous
amount of health problems cardiovascular
disease people who feel they're isolated
perceive themselves anyway it's a
subjective thing is isolated definitely
have higher glucose higher cortisol
higher initially yeah yeah that's right
so that just you know opens up a whole
new door of healthcare of how do we
combat this increasing society problem
societal problem of loneliness which is
you know getting worse with each
subsequent generation but the doctor
doesn't even know you're though she's a
doctor is eight minutes to dispensable
right sorry I thought that was very
interesting where if you can the first
half of the book if you can have doctors
be more data-driven solve a lot of their
problems with data then they can focus
more on this human part you know spend
more time with this person this old
person are they alone they ask them
questions and engage more in the human
side of medicine that the data shows is
clearly health care but that it's like
the Eric Topol book about humanizing
health care with a I forget the title it
sort of had this similar message and
it's like no there there's no incentives
that they'll go from eight minutes to an
hour with each patient all what will
happen if the systems could help do we
still have eight minutes but they would
somehow push more through there's no
there isn't more time with there's
nothing to drive an incentive of more
time with patient etcetera I I didn't
understand most of the book to be honest
it was a bit
I don't know if you know about do and
there there is the new book the price we
pay by Marty McKay he gives a wonderful
example again because our healthcare
system is so onion ofor impaired - like
the NHS or Canada's where it's a
national health care system we get these
strange pockets of brilliance and one
example he gave was this payment system
where you give a clinic of primary
practitioners a bolus of money per
patient right so if they have a thousand
patients that you give them X amount of
dollars for the year now the incentive
for all these practitioners is to do
everything to maintain the their health
do preventive medicine as cheaply and as
good as possible and what you see in
these clinics when they do that they
spend much more time with the patient as
you know this is the sort of human
reaction and go through stuff much more
thoroughly because their incentives are
now aligned to do that I want to Holmen
and a doctor here and I see I'm I've
over show they're great time by a couple
of minutes so let me try and finish off
on one more question I'll just share a
couple areas where my mind has been
since 2015 and see what thoughts you
have
they are ventilated to to validate
things back in in the hyper well-being
concept etc back in 2015 the splash page
back then stated it's funny looking back
in time now connective technologies are
knowing us ever more intimately our
physical and sexual activities motion
and gestures sleep and reproductive
cycles and nutritional intake plus
increase in physiological measurements
more recently our moods emotions
thoughts and tensions and speech and you
know because I realize that an intimacy
barrier had been crossed between man and
machine and we should use it for
something utopian we're and then at the
same time I had built up an appreciation
of epigenetics and so in 2016 I made
this statement which over read our most
pressing health issues today are caused
by the lifelong daily interaction
among our genetics environment and
lifestyle choices a dynamic interplay of
our biology environment psychology and
our behavior interwoven now when you you
you take those two things together
machines knowing us and our health being
self determined not deterministic as
I've been brought to believe it's a
perfect marriage because it's about our
social networks as by our affective
States it's about our physiology moment
to moment our stress levels now doctors
are not watching what we eat over to our
recording how we feel moment to moment
or recording our stress levels during a
day or our glucose response alone she
would be absurd and so clearly the
future is machine and sensor and AI
driven a minimum for prediction
prevention anti-aging optimization
surely the Machine is center stage there
I mean Brad Parkin said it will require
argues other way and says hey medicine
will become a data science aport by
clinicians rather than clinicians
supported by data do you have any
thoughts there wow yeah that's a lot of
content but yeah I mean my thoughts
toward the end there was that's really
what inner mouth you know these places
that are doing this so well that's what
they're doing is they're the the data is
driving the clinicians not not the other
I'm going to need to look more into
Intermountain yeah yeah that's that's a
brilliant example of this and you know
AI is already doing things better for
example radiology I mean med students
are fleeing radiology at the moment
because Google's got a program and I
think others now that will use
artificial intelligence to diagnose
radiology films images and they're
extraordinarily good at it so they just
show you know they show this program
thousands of these scans and it learns
how to diagnose and it doesn't know it's
showing is much better than the human
being
yeah consumer diagnostics will also grow
significantly I mean as an
understatement but it becomes so
powerful in the diagnostic side when you
do have a condition at the consumer and
I don't think people are seeing the
decentralization of healthcare people
keep speaking of it and as if this
system will stay but there's a new
system in play I think it's like Tesla
versus GM yeah in healthcare I don't
people are seeing this new sensor driven
driven by the semiconductor industry
computer science moving to healthcare
instead of healthcare becoming digitized
there is something new emerging as I say
it's a multi trillion market yeah I
think this is affecting every industry
you know this new incursion of data and
analytics and AI know industry is going
to escape the effect of this how far it
goes I don't know you know I don't know
where you get too much information for a
consumer to even rationally to you know
to use or you get this kind of weird
thing where you're not even living your
life you're just there's too much you
know and I don't know where that balance
is gonna be struck I guess but you know
we're grappling with that in society
everywhere about how do we use all this
data and what's what is too much what is
it too much incursion into our lives so
it's an interesting argument and it's
it's it's really you know I got some far
so we probably can do this now but
really kind of philosophical thoughts on
on this process but it's undoubtedly the
trend is there you're absolutely right
it's only have you read any of you've
all heard arrays books you know he
speaks of data ISM no I haven't read
those huh I think I'm going to invite
him on but I see the time here and so I
just want to give you the opportunity if
you feel like didn't cover anything or
if there's anything that you would like
to say then please do no I think we did
that was a broad sweep of everything in
the book and I think we covered a lot of
ground there and I think the last
message I'll give people is you know one
of optimism all these things that we're
talking about these changes
are good and there will be a time and
this stuff is moving extraordinarily
rapidly these life anti-aging
technologies and things like that you
know
are the next generation hopefully even
our generation is could could
realistically see a dramatic extension
in in our lifespans so these problem the
technology we tend to evaluate things in
a very short timeframe as humans but
this trend is moving so rapidly you know
and you look out in decades ahead I
think there will be substantial change
in the right direction I think that I
think this is the era the the next
decade is about why I've termed human as
a platform and I I witnessed the PC when
it came I witnessed a smartphone when it
came I was deeply interested in both
revolutions but I think this is the most
exciting revolution as innovation heads
towards a body you know when you eat an
apple an apple is a set number lines of
code that is executed on the body
platform and we're moving into this not
just systems biology but human in the
world systems I think where were I'm
credibly excited about the future is you
can bind epigenetics decentralization of
healthcare anti-aging is a brilliant
time to be living and it's not just you
know stopping yourself getting disease
it's also changing your effective stays
possibly with saying nootropics
wind with dashboards for our minds
emotions and bodies yeah I feel the same
way Lee I'm very excited optimistic and
and I think the best is certainly yet to
come I must thank you for the book
because I greatly admire someone who can
actually book out the door whereas I've
been spending four years collecting
information and every day I keep adding
to instead of truncating it down I keep
synthesizing but then expanding and I'd
like to talk to you sometimes about how
you're able to do the opposite actually
get something a bit or so thank you very
much for the book it's out tomorrow on
Kendall people will hear this after the
because oh so I'm sure you'll greatly in
trust people in checking the book code
Thank You Lee that was fun
thank you very much Travis greatly
appreciated for your I don't take care
for more information
PC hyper well-being calm or follow
twitter at hyper wealthy
[Music]
you